The correlation of high population and high use of private vehicles is a known contributor to traffic congestion, consequently increasing carbon dioxide emissions into the environment, and traffic incidents. It is essential to manage traffic well to help the urban population in their daily lives and improve overall transportation efficiency. Accurate traffic information prediction is imperative for urban planning, intelligent urban traffic management, and determining the risk of road accidents. Most of the existing work implemented batch methods to process traffic data, which cannot support real-time prediction. Currently, there is minimal literature available on real-time traffic prediction. Our project will develop a real-time traffic model by analyzing various sensor data.

Our real-time traffic prediction system helps to detect and display current traffic conditions on a particular road. The proposed model uses data recorded from road sensors and a variety of other sources. Capturing massive amounts of sensor data and processing it in real-time is a very challenging task. The sensor data is ingested by streaming analytics platforms using big data technologies and processed using various deep learning and machine learning algorithms.  

Due to the availability of a wide range of data analytic techniques, it is challenging for businesses and data scientists to choose the right approach to make data-driven traffic decisions. We will provide reliable models that can help predict traffic congestion. Moreover, our models can support the adaptive toll fare and carpool system on congested roads to reduce potential traffic congestion and provide suggestions for urban planners. This project will fill the gap in the data analytics field by contributing a more accurate and reliable model that uses IoT sensor data and other data sources. Organizations like transportation authorities and public safety services can also benefit from this approach by implementing it in their platforms to make proactive decisions.
